
All use subject to https
 Ethnie Identity and Imperative
 Patriotism: Arab Americans
 Before and After 9/11
 Steven Salaita
 Steven Salaita is assistant profes
 sor of Multicultural literature at
 the University of Wisconsin
 Whitewater and the author of
 Anti-ArabRacism: How
 Myth and patriotism
 Combine to Inhibit
 Democracy (2005).
 Introduction
 This article will examine the effects of
 9/11 on Arab Americans and other
 minorities. 9/11 altered nearly all aspects
 of American life; even the so-called restora
 tion of "the American lifestyle" is a contrived
 metamorphosis given the deliberate manner
 in which American leaders urged its conva
 lescence. 9/11 and its aftermath leave social
 critics with a remarkably broad range of
 issues to examine, primary among them a
 more patriotic?some might say more defen
 sive?sensibility among students and educa
 tors. This sensibility is especially apropos in
 relation to what is often referred to as ethnic
 or multicultural studies. (Even though both
 terms are problematic, I will use the more
 common designation ethnic studies to describe
 the area studies of non-White American eth
 nic groups.) Ethnic critics have long invoked
 and then challenged centers of traditional
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 Steven Salaita 147
 (White) American power. They also have maintained strong ties to radical
 politics; ethnic critics, in fact, have been pivotal in unmasking the workings
 of American imperialism and in turn formulating alternative politics in
 response to that imperialism, both domestic and international (for instance,
 Edward Said, Vine Deloria, Jr., Robert Warrior, Elizabeth Cook-Lynn,
 Barbara Christian, Craig Womack, Lisa Suhair Majaj).
 Because ethnic critics challenge the production and reproduction of
 American hegemony, we must explore how those challenges function in a
 newly reactive?indeed, at times oppressive?American atmosphere. After
 9/11, dissent, a cornerstone of ethnic studies, was attacked as unpatriotic, a
 serious accusation in today's society. In modern American universities, which
 increasingly are seen as investments that ultimately must pay dividends, dis
 sent?i.e., lack of patriotism?is conceptualized as irresponsible by enraged
 parents and conservative groups. Since dissent is inherent in ethnic studies, it
 is usually the target of the attacks (NoIndoctrination.org, for example, is
 filled with African American Studies courses). An American Indian Studies
 professor put it to me this way in a recent conversation: "How do we get
 people to understand the reality of American imperialism in Indian commu
 nities when imperialism is such a taboo topic now?"With the appropriate vari
 ations, this is a crucial question for any scholar dealing with domestic or inter
 national communities that are in some sort of conflict with the United States.
 As an Arab American critic, I feel particularly affected by the question
 enumerated above. If we alter it a bit, we are left with the following: How do
 instructors of Arab American culture and society comprehend the position
 of the Arab American community in the aftermath of 9/11? How have Arab
 American culture and society changed? How, in turn, has the pedagogy of
 Arab America changed? And how, most important, do we find a viable space
 to develop Arab American Studies now that Arab Americans receive the sort
 of attention for which its scholars once clamored?
 The last question is resonant, albeit extraordinarily complex. While Arab
 American critics once lamented a lack of Arab American issues in various
 disciplines, the sudden inclusion of those issues across the academic spectrum
 is at best ambivalent. Before 9/11, Arab American scholars were only begin
 ning to theorize the relationship between Arab Americans and the field of
 ethnic studies (as well as other fields and area studies).We therefore have lit
 tle prior scholarship with which to work in speculating how to position in
 the Academy what has become a highly manifold community after 9/11. In
 the following sections, I will summarize relevant issues in Arab America
 before and after 9/11; analyze the post-9/11 terminology that shapes main
 stream perceptions of Arabs and Arab Americans; discuss theoretical issues
 that influence both the production and reception of Arab American scholar
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 148 College Literature 32.2 [Spring 2005]
 ship; and assess possible relationships among Arab American politics and the
 politics of other ethnic or minority groups.
 Arab Americans Before and After
 It perhaps is foolish to discuss the development of a communal scholar
 ship in the aftermath of a particular event. We would like to think, after all,
 that scholarship?its production and reception?is shaped by more than
 reaction. Many of us also promote the semi-idealized notion that scholarship
 shapes events just as much as it is shaped by them. Literary critics, in partic
 ular, have attended to questions of influence and resistance for decades, a
 process that raised more questions with few answers. The recent ascendance
 of ethnic literatures has both informed and complicated longstanding debates
 about the uses and usefulness of literature, which, before the rise of multi
 culturalism, focused almost exclusively on White authors of the traditional
 canon. That ascendance is especially resonant after 9/11, an event whose
 socio-political implications scholars and philosophers are only beginning to
 understand. I mention literature here because it is so often a site where cul
 tural and moral conflicts are invoked and analyzed, indeed encoded. I want
 to explore those conflicts on their own in the hope that, later, we can better
 apply them to discussion of literature or the pedagogy of literature. More
 than anybody, Arab Americans experienced far-reaching socio-political
 implications following 9/11 without, unfortunately, generating a correspon
 ding body of internally constructed?i.e., Arab American produced?schol
 arship to examine the rapid transformations occurring in the community.
 These socio-political implications are only now starting to develop into ana
 lyzable phenomena. Most important, though, Arab Americans did not have a
 mature scholarly apparatus before 9/11. It has proved challenging to develop
 one in response to an event that so drastically affected the makeup of the
 Arab American community.
 The last point warrants some attention because it will be of central con
 cern to my essay. In the years preceding 9/11, Arab American scholars from
 a variety of disciplines were discussing Americans of Middle Eastern back
 ground as Arab Americans?a development whose importance should not be
 underestimated?and assessing some possibilities of coalescing a distinct area
 study around that category. Literary critics undertook a majority of the
 attempts, but were buttressed?sometimes conjoindy?by historians, anthro
 pologists, creative writers, psychologists, philosophers, sociologists, lawyers,
 demographers, pollsters, and others. Although academic circles and American
 society in total occasionally acknowledged an Arab American entity, the
 community was largely, in Nadine Naber's words, "the 'invisible' racial/eth
 nic group" of the United States (2000, 37). 9/11 dramatically altered this
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 Steven Salaita 149
 reality. Arab Americans evolved from invisible to glaringly conspicuous
 (whether or not the conspicuousness was welcomed).
 Such a drastic evolution in some cases reinforced the salience of pre
 9/11 scholarship, but in other cases rendered it antiquated or, worse, useless.
 Before 9/11 scholars examined Arab American invisibility or marginality?
 or whatever other term they employed to denote peripherality?but after
 9/11 they were faced with a demand to transmit or translate their culture to
 mainstream Americans. The demand was matched by an insatiable curiosity
 about Arabs and Arab Americans; everybody from "everyday" Americans to
 high-ranking politicians wanted to know about the people who had irrevo
 cably altered American life. Arab Americans suddenly were visible, and
 because of the pernicious intentions of various law and intelligence agencies,
 that visibility was not necessarily embraced. Indeed, it was often feared and
 deplored. These issues suddenly forced Arab Americans into a paradigm shift
 whose implications are enormous because there was no stable paradigm from
 which to shift emphasis in the first place. An area study that had been
 exploratory immediately became too much in demand for its own good.
 Another competing but no less relevant factor deals with the political
 sensibilities of the Arab American community. Michael Suleiman (1999),
 Alixa Naff (1993), Eric Hooglund (1987), Nabeel Abraham (1994), and
 Nadine Naber (2000) all agree that before the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, Arab
 Americans, who were overwhelmingly Christian at that point, tended to
 assimilate even while maintaining cultural features of the so-called Old World
 (e.g., food, theology, child rearing, family ties?the Arabic language, for the
 most part, was not passed down from immigrants to children). After 1967,
 however, many Arab Americans reclaimed a sense of nationalism. The nation
 alism, sparked in large part by glaring Arab dispossession, was reinforced by a
 new wave of Muslim Arab immigrants who had been politicized already in
 the Arab World and had no need, given America's fairly protected civil liber
 ties, to hide their ethnic-religious identities. Newly arrived Christian and
 Druze Arabs did the same. A steady appearance of "pro-Arab" or "revision
 ist" historiography on the Middle East in the following years helped to instill
 ethnic pride in Arab Americans, who, prior to 1967, had virtually no repre
 sentation in popular and political American culture. By the 1990s, a thorough
 ly Arab consciousness existed in Arab immigrants and American-born Arabs,
 who rapidly were expressing that consciousness intellectually and creatively.
 Although no single form of consciousness?or conception of Arab
 American?can be said to have existed during this period, scholars were on the
 verge of critical breakthroughs in the years directly preceding 9/11. This fact
 was evident in the publication of Michael Suleiman's edited volume Arabs in
 America: Building a New Future (1999), Khaled Mattawa and Munir Akash's Post
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 150 College Literature 32.2 [Spring 2005]
 Gibran: Anthology of New Arab American Writing (1999), and a series of theoret
 ically sophisticated articles by Lisa Suhair Majaj. In the literary arena, Diana
 Abu-Jaber and Rabih Alamedine received wide acclaim for novels that
 invoked both Arab American and Middle Eastern themes. Vibrant gatherings
 to celebrate Arab cultures and discuss Arab American concerns occurred
 across the United States, in large cities and rural towns. College students with
 half or quarter Arab blood, some three or four generations removed from the
 Middle East (usually Syria or Lebanon), suddenly found value in being Arab
 American and reclaimed their ethnicity by visiting the Middle East to learn
 Arabic or work for NGOs in villages and refugee camps. This phenomenon
 can only be understood if we situate it with similar phenomena occurring
 with individuals from other ethnic groups?N. Scott Momaday s famous
 example of his mixedblood mother "choosing" to be Cherokee, for instance.
 It is no accident that such ethnic valuations, whatever their merits and prob
 lems, corresponded with the rise of the Black and Indian power movements
 of the sixties and seventies, as well as the NAACP, the Southern Christian
 Leadership Conference [SCLC], and various anti-war organizations (even vir
 ulendy anti-Arab groups like Meir Kahane's Jewish Defense League helped to
 create an atmosphere in which ethnic identity assumed great importance).
 While it is difficult to comprehend fully the effects of those movements, they
 often gave marginalized, lonely, or ambivalent youth (or adults in some cases)
 the illusion of stable identity or a feeling of belonging to communities distin
 guishable from mainstream society. The feeling was especially powerful for
 those displeased with certain American politics.This motivation has been par
 ticularly resonant in Arab America.
 The reclamation or recovery of an Arab American identity is in many
 ways analogous to the social trajectories of other ethnic groups, and can
 therefore be considered typical of modern American acculturation and
 deculturation. And yet international relations have played a prominent role in
 the construction and consolidation of Arab America as a social and political
 unit. Nothing has been of more concern to Arab Americans since 1967 than
 the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, although Iraq has also been pivotal since 1990.
 American support for Israel has long enraged Arab Americans (and others),
 thereby providing Arab Americans with a tangible rallying cry and political
 purpose. The support also has been an important binding force for a com
 munity that, despite popular perception, is far from homogenous, containing
 as it does people with over twenty national backgrounds, a multitude of lin
 guistic dialects, and numerous religions. Therefore, while Palestine may have
 expedited the coalescence of an Arab American identity, it in no way exclu
 sively dictates or maintains it. Like any other ethnic group, Arab Americans
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 Steven Salaita 151
 function as a communal entity based on innumerable factors, both cultural
 and political.
 Ultimately, though, it can be said that no single event shaped the destiny
 of Arab Americans more than 9/11. After 9/11, the Arab American commu
 nity, which consists of approximately five million people, was thrust into the
 spotlight. This attention represented a drastic change from the community's
 previous position, for during the times that Arab Americans attempted to be
 noticed?times generally related to their flagship issue, Palestinian independ
 ence^?it was rare for mainstream forums to acknowledge them. When Arab
 Americans were acknowledged, it was usually in the form of ridicule, dis
 missal, or an outright racism that had long been considered an unacceptable
 way to address other ethnic groups. It is a general rule that ambivalence will
 follow when a once-ignored or outright slandered community is suddenly
 offered unceasing attention and is asked to define and redefine itself daily. The
 peculiar nature of the sudden attention after 9/11 only did more to catalyze
 Arab Americans into serious introspective glances. That attention was simul
 taneously an outpouring of hostility and kindness. On the day of the attack,
 Rudy Guliani and George W Bush urged Americans not to engage in racial
 violence and to prevent any that might occur, as did practically every televi
 sion commentator and politician of significance. For every racist comment
 and report of harassment, there were ten stories about "average" Americans
 going out of their way to make their Arab neighbors feel safe and welcome.
 But what do those pronouncements actually reveal about the culture
 from which they were produced and the community at which they were
 directed? And what were their effects on both? First, while they were in
 some cases sincere when uttered by politicians and probably sincere in every
 case when uttered by civilians, the cultural impulses inspiring them cannot
 be considered altogether pure since they drew tacitly from a tradition of
 forced assimilation. (It is also problematic that such pronouncements needed
 constant repeating to begin with.) While the goodwill of everyday
 Americans cannot be called into question, one might look upon aspects of
 the discourse of American leaders with suspicion. They attempted to urge
 Arab Americans, before 9/11 generally anti-assimilationist and radical, into
 total assimilation. In this case, it was not a forced assimilation that other eth
 nic groups, primarily natives, have experienced. It took the form of the
 repeated statements: "They're American, too"; "They're American, just like
 you"; "They also love this country."The suspicion I cite should be drawn out
 briefly. A community can accept the call, whether or not it was solicited, to
 be absorbed fully into the politics of its surrounding society only if it assumes
 that the surrounding society's politics are amenable to the community. This
 has never been the case with Arab Americans because the American govern
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 152 College Literature 32.2 [Spring 2005]
 ment has long been involved in the Arab World in a way that most Arab
 Americans find invasive and unjust. Moreover, draconian legislation like the
 USA Patriot Act wholly contradicts the occasionally inclusive language of
 Congress and the Bush Administration.
 The Patriot Act, however, is only the first legislative initiative of what
 many legal scholars fear will be a series of federal resolutions that might
 severely limit civil liberties. In January, 2003, Bill Moyers posted on the
 NOW website the text for the Domestic Security Enhancement Act [DSEA]
 (also known as Patriot Act II), which would further enable federal agents and
 intelligence officials to intrude in people s private lives and detain them for
 indefinite periods of time without legal counsel based solely on suspicion.
 This type of legislation may soon not be limited to visitors, immigrants,
 aliens, or permanent residents. American citizens also are under scrutiny. In
 February, 2003, The Nations David Cole revealed the purpose of the DSEA.
 He writes,
 If the Patriot Act was so named to imply that those who question its sweep
 ing new powers of surveillance, detention and prosecution are traitors, the
 DSEA takes that theme one giant step further. It provides that any citizen,
 even native-born, who supports even the lawful activities of an organization
 the executive branch deems "terrorist" is presumptively stripped of his or her
 citizenship. To date, the "war on terrorism" has largely been directed at
 noncitizens, especially Arabs and Muslims. But the DSEA would actually
 turn citizens associated with "terrorist" groups into aliens. (Cole 2003, 4)
 Cole later notes that suspect citizens "would then be subject to the deporta
 tion power, which the DSEA would expand to give the Attorney General
 the authority to deport any noncitizen whose presence he deems a threat to
 our 'national defense, foreign policy or economic interests'" (2003, 4).
 The domestic environment, then, is one that terrifies many Arab
 Americans and keeps them from politics, especially Palestinian politics,
 because the fear of being harassed or arrested is more than mere paranoia. At
 the same time, Arab Americans feel that they have no real leadership on
 which they can rely. Nobody genuinely speaks their concerns in the media
 and nobody has the adequate power to protect them from FBI investigations
 should their names become suspicious to American officials. Arab Americans,
 and many others, are under the impression that speaking too loudly against
 the war on terror or American support for Israel is a viable cause for suspi
 cion. In addition, Arab Americans cannot discuss on campus the conditions
 of Palestinian life in the occupied territories without harassment, complaints
 of anti-Americanism, or, worse, accusations of anti-Semitism.
 All the issues enumerated above have appeared in Arab American litera
 ture. Direcdy following 9/11, Palestinian American poet Suhair Hammad
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 Steven Salaita 153
 penned a widely circulated poem, "First Writing Since," that explored her
 shared ethnicity with the hijackers and her shared nationality with their vic
 tims. The Arab American literary journal Mizna has run poems, short stories,
 and essays that deal with the effects of 9/11 on Arab American identity and
 on the relationship between Arab Americans and their Arab brethren (the
 first issue after 9/11 was devoted entirely to the attacks).The themes are con
 stant and usually didactic: The authors feel closer to the American polity and
 concurrently isolated from it. That sort of theme denotes, as Bill Ashcroft and
 Pal Ahluwalia have described of Edward Said, the paradox of identity. In the
 year after 9/11 no critical study of identity in the Arab American communi
 ty was published in a sociological, psychological, historical, or literary jour
 nal, with one exception: A Middle East Report devoted to the influence of
 9/11 on Arab and Muslim Americans. This lack of critical inquiry is, of
 course, highly problematic, as the Arab American community continues to
 enhance its ambivalence by allowing the dominant society to define it and
 speak on its behalf. Arab Americans seem on the verge of borrowing from
 the sensibilities common among scholars of other ethnic groups in pro
 claiming that no matter how well-intentioned the speaker, when it comes to
 community issues, it should be Arab Americans who have priority in speak
 ing. One often finds this sentiment expressed in literature, since numerous
 Arab Americans find it the last haven of articulation that still belongs to
 them. Cultural journals such as Mizna, JUSOOR, and al-Jadid have therefore
 assumed great importance in the community during the past few years.
 "The American Way of Life"
 Some years back, I published a column in the Palestine Chronicle urging
 Arab Americans to reformulate a self-image by rejecting the vocabulary of
 "terrorism" employed so uncritically in today's United States. My columns
 for the paper usually elicited passionate reactions, but this one provoked out
 right anger from a few American readers whose vocabulary I had attacked.
 One reader demanded to know why I "split time between the United States
 and the Middle East," as my author bio explained. The message claimed that
 discomfiting motivations were evident in my article: "Apparently your dislike
 for the American way of life and the determination of the current adminis
 tration to keep it that way, even if it means war, is a problem for you."
 This formulation in many ways accurately highlights the relationship
 between Arab Americans and the larger society in which they live. Often
 accused of dual sympathies, Arab Americans feel sometimes as if they are
 removed (of their own accord) from the Middle East, but equally removed
 (not of their own accord) from the United States. Xenophobia certainly plays
 a role in the isolation many Arab Americans feel, but it would be foolish to
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 154 College Literature 32.2 [Spring 2005]
 limit our analysis to either xenophobia or racism. While the respondent to
 my article is most likely xenophobic and perhaps racist?would she have
 objected had I split time between the United States and, say, Britain??her
 sensibilities can be attributed to a more profound phenomenon dating to the
 setdement of the New World.
 I speak about a particular type of discourse that, with technical and tem
 poral variations, has existed continuously in the United States, what I term
 imperative patriotism. Imperative patriotism assumes (or demands) that dissent
 in matters of governance and foreign affairs is unpatriotic and therefore unsa
 vory. It is drawn from a longstanding sensibility that nonconformity to what
 ever at the time is considered to be "the national interest" is unpatriotic.
 Imperative patriotism is most likely to arise in settler societies, which usual
 ly need to create a juridical mentality that professes some sort of divine man
 date to legitimize their presence on indigenous land. The juridical mentality
 impresses conformity on the settlers, who might otherwise demur when
 being asked to slaughter indigenes or when absorbing attacks by them.
 Hilton Obenzinger demonstrates that this mentality existed in early America,
 where setders "invested New England settlement, and by extension all of
 America, with a sense of religious destiny: that the new society extinguish
 ing the various indigenous peoples' claims to land and independence was a
 re-creation of the scriptural narrative of covenantal, chosen-people identity"
 (1999,24).
 This sensibility has evolved into a detectable feature of modern
 American politics. When one hears George W Bush present war on Iraq as a
 "war for civilization" and make statements such as "either you are for us or
 against us" and "God is on America's side," it becomes clear that early setder
 ethos, in which the setders were conferred a divine mission, continue to
 influence American discourse?and, more important, American morality.
 Imperative patriotism arises in this context. I prefer the phrase imperative patri
 otism to the unmodified patriotism because the word imperative insinuates
 necessity and purpose. It further denotes a particular set of American desires
 (enumerated below) that connects to a historical dynamic. In modern
 America, while imperative patriotism functions at the levels of discourse and
 philosophy, it generates its strength most consistendy at the level of morali
 ty. Imperative patriotism manifests itself most explicidy during wartime or
 domestic unrest. Ethnic nationalist movements, such as the American Indian
 Movement and Black Panthers, were widely considered to be inimical to
 American values and therefore also caused the manifestation of imperative
 patriotism. (Even movements using less nationalist rhetoric, such as the
 SCLC and Cesar Chavez's United Farm Workers, evoked fear in many
 Americans.) Moreover, imperative patriotism both informs and is derived
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 Steven Salaita 155
 from colonial discourse. Politicians frequently speak about the need to occu
 py Arab countries and "civilize" them by introducing the natives to "democ
 racy." (Like the colonial discourse before it, this one rarely mentions the actu
 al motivation for intervention: The plunder of resources, in this case oil.)
 Americans today hear so much about the need for their government's "lead
 ership" in all areas of the world that most, like the Europeans before them,
 automatically equate colonization with generosity and moral strength.
 Yet perhaps the most crucial (and discomfiting) feature of imperative
 patriotism is its relationship with xenophobia. While imperative patriotism
 has a symbiotic moral association with colonial discourse, it is more discon
 nected from xenophobia because it does not actually arise from xenophobia,
 which is a phenomenon that, to a degree, has its roots in European contact
 with Indians, but more traditionally has resulted from animosity over (per
 ceived or real) economic disparity. On one level, xenophobia is a less vicious
 form of colonial discourse, but it more often results from a certain type of
 fear that is generated when people feel that their economic stability (or the
 possibility of it) is threatened?as, for instance, when laborers battle with
 immigrants over blue-collar jobs or when middle- to upper-class Whites
 complain to city councils about immigrants moving into their neighbor
 hoods. Imperative patriotism, however, tends to inform xenophobia, a fact
 that is expressed in statements such as, "If you don't like America, go back to
 where you came from";"If you don't agree with the United States, why don't
 you just leave?"; and "A real American works hard and doesn't complain."
 These statements insinuate that "American" is a stable, fixed identity rooted
 in a physical and cultural Whiteness for which many immigrants do not qual
 ify. They also indicate that in xenophobia narrow political suppositions often
 govern social behavior: To dissent against the imagined mores of America is
 to forfeit identification as American. Leaving the United States then becomes
 the only logical option.
 It is easy to see how these suppositions are played out in the reader's
 complaint that I "dislike the American way of life." The reader assumes that
 only one or few forms of thought and/or behavior constitute "the American
 way of life." This sensibility has long been common in the United States and
 has proliferated since 9/11, in no small part because of the colonial discourse
 arising from hawks in Washington. And yet it would be reductionist to attrib
 ute the sensibility to a crude xenophobia informed by imperative patriotism.
 It is better conceptualized as an articulation of imperative patriotism that
 appears at first glance to be crude xenophobia, but in reality brings to mind
 remnants of settler discourse with its rigid juridical undercurrents. One
 might argue that it is impossible to define "the American way of life" since
 the United States is a multicultural society with thousands of subcultures (not
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 156 College Literature 32.2 [Spring 2005]
 to mention the fact that numerous Central and South Americans also con
 sider themselves to be "American"). Nevertheless, at the popular level, it is
 assumed that a "true" American is (or should be) patriotic and capitalistic,
 and, less explicidy, Christian and White.
 Arab Americans exist as a composite of postmodern Americana and
 American subculture in this complex of issues. To various degrees, their posi
 tioning in the United States has been highly complex for some time, but
 9/11 exacerbated the complexities by simultaneously endowing the com
 munity with sympathetic gestures and amplifying xenophobic outpourings
 of imperative patriotism, a mindset that is by its very nature antithetical to
 the Arab American experience. The irony of this positioning became evident
 when Doug Mariette, a senior writer for the Tallahassee Democrat, portrayed
 Mohammad as a terrorist driving a truck loaded with nuclear bombs, a por
 trayal for which the Democrat refused to apologize. Three weeks later, a
 church in Jacksonville, which has a sizeable Arab American population, post
 ed a sign claiming that Mohammad condoned murder. While Arab
 Americans protested these stereotypes, it was another Christian conservative,
 radio columnist Andy Martin of Florida, who offered the most vocal
 response: "I thought we were past that kind of bigotry and ignorance in
 Florida. But apparendy not. . . . Any religious leader who fosters bigotry is
 not a religious leader; he or she is espousing evil."
 It is difficult to determine whether the discourse seen in the Democrat
 and on the Jacksonville church sign might accurately be construed as racism.
 Racism is a complicated term, and ethnic studies scholars do their communi
 ties little favor by applying it loosely and uniformly to a wide range of dis
 cursive phenomena. In defining the Jacksonville discourse as racist, one also
 must contemplate whether all agents of imperative patriotism are racist. We
 are then left with questions about whether forms of racism expressed uncon
 sciously are as pernicious, in intent and action, as outright racism. The same
 concern exists with xenophobia. It would be foolish to decontextualize these
 issues from the founding narratives of the United States. If ethnic cleansing
 and slavery, among other odious practices, played a salient role in the physi
 cal and psychological formation of the United States, then it should be no
 surprise that various types of racism survive. Indeed, one could claim that the
 United States has a collective sickness that results from never having official
 ly confronted its destruction of Indian nations, and that this sickness
 accounts, however abstractly, for many persisting social problems (imperative
 patriotism, xenophobia, racism, sexism, discrimination). Rather than arguing
 that various types of racism actually exist, we are better served understand
 ing the actual extent of their existence.
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 Steven Salaita 157
 Arab Americans are in a special position to assist in that understanding.
 First of all, I would argue that the Jacksonville discourse is racist precisely
 because it cannot be decontextualized from (admittedly more noxious) inci
 dents in the American past. When considering this sort of argument, our ana
 lytical framework should include the peculiar amalgam of millenialism, mes
 sianism, and extremism that marked European settlement of the New World,
 particularly in New England. Modern American racism developed as a result
 of the imagery of Indians and Africans promulgated by White settlers?a
 process that continues into the present?in addition to foreign intervention
 and biological determinism. Indeed, the covenantal messianism with which
 early American settlers invested their identity invents and reinvents itself
 based on deeply encoded notions of racial superiority. Those notions have
 been modernized, sometimes disguised as pragmatism, and manage to per
 vade a surprisingly large portion of mainstream American discourse. The
 label of racism can thus be applied to anti-Arab vitriol independent of the
 severe dehumanization that occurs by construing a religious group's prophet
 as a pedophile. If, after all, Mohammed is portrayed as subhuman, what does
 it imply about those who follow his religion?
 Obviously, Arab Americans interact with the dominant American culture
 based on the specifics of Arab immigration and the subsequent development
 of the Arab American community. But once Arabs formed a distinct com
 munal identity, as do all American ethnic minorities, they inherited a cen
 turies-old history of ethnic-mainstream conflict that has yet to be assessed in
 detail, either before or after 9/11. Settlement, dispossession, slavery, and over
 seas imperialism all are included in that inheritance. The overseas imperial
 ism has traditionally been most resonant in the Arab American community
 and is the centerpiece of the community's current reorganization. Like most
 other minorities, Arab Americans "piggyback" the ethnic tensions that were
 developed uniquely in the United States based primarily on the oppression
 of Blacks and Indians. Imperialism, however, is the most immediate issue fac
 ing Arab Americans, since much of the imperialism is directed at the Arab
 World (especially if we consider, as I do, Israel's occupation of the West Bank
 and Gaza Strip to be an aspect of American imperialism).
 Based on this formulation, I reject the notion that anti-Arab racism was
 formed and has evolved based solely on social features (primarily geopolitics)
 detectable in the interaction of Arabism and Americana. We are better served
 looking at that racism as a continuum with roots in settler colonialism. A cor
 relative settler colonialism in the West Bank, after all, accounts for much of
 the tension between the United States and Arab nations?and, by extension,
 Arab Americans. American racism had thrived for years before the first Arab
 arrived in North America; Arab Americans have faced an evolution of that
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 158 College Literature 32.2 [Spring 2005]
 racism since they began to vocally articulate a Middle Eastern identity after
 1967 (which rehashed some of the tensions developed between America's
 Founding Fathers and Muslim pirates off the Barbary Coast 200 years earli
 er). It is not necessarily a modern racism, but one that has been perpetually
 reformulated based on contemporary popular and political sentiment and a
 failure by American leaders to adequately confront the past, in philosophy by
 apologizing and erecting monuments, or in practice by eliminating colo
 nization and dispossession in other parts of the world.
 9/11, according to this analysis, did not really disrupt anti-Arab racism in
 any momentous way. Rather, it polarized attitudes that had been in place
 years before the word terrorism became common parlance. While 9/11 forced
 most Americans to confront issues?foreign policy, civil liberties, immigrants,
 minority rights?that had often been muted or ignored, a detectable pre
 9/11 trajectory has reasserted itself: Those who were prone to racism or
 xenophobia before 9/11 (mainly the advocates of imperative patriotism)
 found a justification for them; conversely, those who were prone to support
 multiculturalism (mainly left-liberals and liberal arts academics) have used the
 9/11 backlash against Arab Americans to argue in favor of cosmopolitanism
 and the retention of civil liberties. New Republic editor Martin Peretz, for
 example, has long articulated anti-Arab racism. In 1995, he proclaimed "that
 there is a convulsion in Islam, whose particular expression is terror" (1995,
 47). Alerting Americans to "the very real phenomenon of an international
 killer jihad," he later wrote, "[S]o much of the spate of terror the world has
 witnessed [in the past] had been wrought by Arabs" (1995, 47).
 These sentiments played an enormous role in creating the sort of xeno
 phobic culture that prompted physical attacks?leading, in some cases, to
 murder?on Arab Americans and those perceived to be Arab American
 (Sikhs, South Asians, Central Asians, Hispanics) by Americans determined to
 preserve imperative patriotism. Four years after Peretz's article, in a piece
 chillingly titled "Terrorism at the Multiplex," Joshua Muravchik echoed
 Peretz by announcing that "the image of Middle Eastern terrorists wreaking
 havoc in the streets of America is both compelling and only too plausible"
 (1999, 57). After 9/11, the same set of stereotypes expressed with an almost
 childish vocabulary?"international killer jihad"??continued unmolested,
 only this time with a rhetorical trope the authors considered infallible.
 Congressman Howard Coble (R-NC) stated on a radio call-in program that
 internment of Arab Americans is worth discussion because "some of these
 Arab Americans are probably intent on doing harm to us." Coble's use of the
 pronoun "us" is noteworthy. It indicates, much like the message I received in
 response to my Chronicle article, that according to the ethnography of imper
 ative patriotism Arab Americans are not actually American. "Us" denotes dif
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 Steven Salaita 159
 ference, alterity, even though Coble contradicted his own grammar by adding
 "American" after "Arab" in juxtaposition with the pronoun "us." Coble's
 invocation of Japanese Americans also illustrates, with frightening clarity, that
 negative attitudes about Arab Americans exist in a historical continuum that
 in many cases led to horrifying behavior.
 Unreasonable and Pragmatic
 The post-9/11 racism enumerated above is not limited to politicians'
 blunders or marginal and/or jingoistic publications. It made its way, for
 instance, into what first appeared to be an evenhanded analysis of the Israeli
 Palestinian conflict on the op-ed page of the Washington Post by former edi
 tor Stephen S. Rosenfeld. Displaying a remarkable, if unconscious, propensi
 ty for turn-of-the-century anthropological essentialism, Rosenfeld attacks
 what he dubs "the Palestinians' killing wing" by explaining, "[T]he
 Palestinians' truest weapon is their high birthrate. It emits a seemingly
 unstoppable flow of adolescents trained in murder" (2003, A25). Rosenfeld's
 statement is at base no different than that offered in 2002 by prominent anti
 Arab racist Daniel Pipes: "[I]n the most elemental terms, we see here [on col
 lege campuses] the contrast between the civilized nature of Israel and its
 friends and the raw barbarism of Israel's enemies" (2002, A22). It is worth
 noting that Pipes, whose brand of extremism exemplifies the very worst
 facets of imperative patriotism, was generally dismissed as a zealot until 9/11,
 after which he became popular among media in search of sensationalistic
 evidence of Islamic aggression or "fifth-column" Arab Americans. (The
 "fifth-column" charge can be found all over Pipes's website by enraged read
 ers who deplore the sensibilities of Arab and Arab American scholars.) In
 fact, Pipes, along with cohorts Stanley Kurtz, Martin Kramer, Steve Emerson,
 and Bill Kristol, as well as a litany of fundamentalist Protestant leaders, exem
 plifies the stereotypical discourse inherent in the post-9/11 backlash against
 Arab Americans.
 About Pipes, Ian Lustick observes that he "takes views that no responsi
 ble academic would ever articulate. He's so far outside the pale of mainstream
 scholarship, yet the [American news] networks need people to give this view
 because it's a popular view. A reasonable position they can get anywhere.
 What they're looking for is an unreasonable position" (qtd. in Brook 2002).
 We can add to Lustick's analysis. What he calls an "unreasonable position" is,
 after 9/11, perfectly reasonable according to the pragmatism of a political
 culture that suddenly found in Arab Americans an excuse to increase federal
 interference in civilian privacy by inducing fear and then working to reduce
 that fear through what is justified as practical means; e.g., ethnic profiling,
 surveillance, citizen spying, detention?things that have occurred recurrent
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 160 College Literature 32.2 [Spring 2005]
 ly throughout modern American history (with, most prominendy, the
 American Indian Movement and Black Panthers). And all are, of course, pur
 portedly done with great regret, in order to preserve the impossibly abstract
 but highly compelling "American way of life" (a phrase Pipes and similar
 writers use incessandy). I would replace Lusticks use of the word "unrea
 sonable" with "pragmatic." Imperative patriotism relies on a perceived prag
 matism in order to command moral legitimacy. Today, the most conspicuous
 feature of the pragmatism is the word terrorism, which is used uncritically to
 describe anybody (of the requisite Arab background) who contests either
 domestic or international American hegemony. A set of common assump
 tions must exist between speaker and audience when terrorism is employed
 without analysis or qualification.Those assumptions, based on the notion that
 terrorism is a morally repugnant and inexplicable act exclusive to the East,
 survive only in the framework of a corresponding assumption, that Arabs are
 inferior in culture and intellect to Americans (read: Whites).
 9/11, as I mentioned above, did not produce these assumptions, although
 it did provide them with pragmatic legitimacy to advocates of imperative
 patriotism already predisposed to anti-Arab racism. The stereotypes underly
 ing the assumptions have long existed and have been expressed through pop
 ular American culture in, among other media, television and film, as the jour
 nal Cin?aste (1989) and media critic Jack Shaheen (2001) have recorded. In a
 detailed study of "the Arab image" in the United States, Ronald Stockton
 surveyed hundreds of representations of Arabs in numerous media, including
 negative statements made by presidents and prominent government officials,
 and concluded that "[t]he generic Arab shares with [the stereotyped] Jews
 thick lips, evil eyes, unkempt hair, scruffy beard, weak chin, crooked nose, vile
 look. He also shares with [the stereotyped] Blacks thick lips, heavy brow, stu
 pid expression, stooped shoulders" (1994,135). Stockton advises "that images
 of Arabs cannot be seen in isolation but are primarily derivative" (120) and
 illustrates the dangers inherent in negative ethnic imagery:
 It is important to remember that while government policies are not simple
 outgrowths of public opinion, governments operate within parameters
 defined by what the public will tolerate. If the public is willing to dehu
 manize a population?be it domestic or foreign?then exceptional latitude
 is allowed where human rights are concerned. Slavery, brutal war, mass
 murder, assassination, and indifference to suffering become more accept
 able. (Stockton 1994,150)
 Stockton, whose essay was published in 1994, offers a portentous analysis,
 especially his caution about depleted human rights and indifference to suffer
 ing. In the same year, Nabeel Abraham similarly cautioned that "anti-Arab
 racism . . . permeates mainstream cultural and political institutions" in the
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 Steven Salaita 161
 United States (1994,159). Stockton's invocation of Jewish stereotypes is note
 worthy because, ironically, anti-Arab racism is derived from the same attitudes
 that produced American anti-Semitism. I dub this situation ironic because one
 way Americans now marginalize Arabs is by labeling them anti-Semitic when
 they articulate their (legitimate) political sensibilities. Imperative patriotism,
 this example illustrates, has the potential to be pervasive.
 Turning back to foreign policy the United States has often fostered hos
 tility with Arabs since the eighteenth-century military engagements off the
 Barbary Coast and has long had economic interests in the Middle East. It has
 therefore long been in conflict with various Arab nations, and so critics never
 had the ability?or in some cases the motivation?to assuage the anti-Arab
 racism Stockton and Abraham describe. More important, since that racism
 can be identified as analogous to traditional forms of racism in existence
 since the settlement of North America, the political culture of the United
 States does not generally inspire a significant oppositional dialectic. Arab
 Americans, then, occupy a critical, if complicated, position in the modern
 United States: They connote how, where, and in what conditions a regener
 ative racism can transmute from tacit to explicit; and they offer ethnic, cul
 tural, and postcolonial studies scholars a remarkable range of social and the
 oretical questions to analyze, all of them central to the understanding and
 development of literary theory.
 Because Arab Americans have difficulty alleviating an anti-Arab racism
 sustained partly by attacks by Arabs on the United States and the correspon
 ding American interests in the Arab World, they have an elaborate relation
 ship with the dominant American culture, which is made even more elabo
 rate by the outpourings of sympathy Arab Americans received immediately
 after 9/11. (Those outpourings have waned considerably four years later.) As
 a result, Arab Americans embody what Jean-Francois Lyotard (1988) calls the
 diff?rend. The diff?rend arises when conflict between two or more groups
 cannot be resolved because of divergent vocabularies representing incongru
 ous sensibilities. Each side of the conflict subsequently feels as if the language
 of dialogue precludes it from receiving justice. Lyotard wanted to revolt
 against both the concept and use of universal language. He believed that to
 overlook the diff?rend in social analysis is tantamount to the denial of justice
 because such an omission denies difference. The differences Lyotard discussed
 are neither primal nor predetermined?that is to say, difference is not an
 unalterable human feature that prevents rapprochement or unity. Rather, the
 acknowledgement of difference?in action and language?is a precondition
 for rapprochement or unity.
 With appropriate variations, we can look at the diff?rend to partially elu
 cidate the relationship among Americans and Arab Americans. Much of the
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 162 College Literature 32.2 [Spring 2005]
 tension I have explored exists because of a specific vocabulary directed at Arab
 Americans. The vocabulary becomes particularly troublesome when it is used
 to explain Arab culture or, more causally, Arab "behavior" to a curious public.
 This is where anti-Arab racists, posing as responsible analysts, poison
 American-Arab American relations. When scholars and commentators
 denounce Arabs and Arab Americans as "terrorists" and threats to "American
 national security" and "the American way of life," to borrow from Campus
 Watch parlance, a profound defensiveness arises in the Arab American com
 munity. That defensiveness, coupled with a longstanding ambivalence about an
 identity that traverses the Adantic, reinforces the influence of the diff?rend,
 which in turn reinforces the inability of Arab Americans to fruitfiilly navigate
 the metaphorical spaces between center and margin in the United States.
 Arab Americans and Ethnic Studies
 Ethnic studies scholars have great impetus to invoke these complexities
 and discuss them to broaden our inquiries of racial and cultural dynamics in
 post-9/11 America. In a time of such tense politics and furious debate over
 the government's management of domestic affairs, the United States is a rap
 idly changing nation. Numerous changes are the result of a small but pivotal
 community whose origin lies in the region that indirecdy enkindled many
 of the domestic transformations enumerated above. As a young Arab
 American professor, I struggle with the same questions that have occupied
 countless scholars of other ethnic groups: How can I adequately respond to
 the racism directed against my community? How does that racism sustain
 itself and inform various aspects of popular American culture? What can my
 community do to embolden and empower its youngsters and academics?
 Where does my community fit in the ever-changing panorama of American
 multiculturalism? Where should it fit?
 These are not easy questions to answer. Entire area studies, after all, have
 been constructed in the past forty years in order to explore them. For Arab
 Americans, one thing is clear. Even if solutions to the questions are difficult
 to ascertain, it is not difficult to ascertain a starting point: The creation of a
 vocabulary geared toward eliminating the diff?rend that obstructs productive
 dialogue with other ethnic groups as well as the American polity in total. In
 order to create that vocabulary, Arab Americans must successfully challenge
 anti-Arab racists such as Pat Robertson, Jerry Falwell, Franklin Graham,
 David Horowitz, Steve Emerson, Ann Coulter, Martin Kramer, Stanley
 Kurtz, and Daniel Pipes.
 How can they be successfully challenged? This question belongs square
 ly in the realm of ethnic studies, with the burgeoning Arab American Studies
 playing a crucial role in an intellectualization of America's popular and polit
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 Steven Salaita 163
 ical cultures. While many of the issues I have discussed arise because of spe
 cific features in the relationship between Arab and non-Arab Americans, they
 are by no means the dominion of Arab American critics. They existed before
 Arab Americans raised their voices as a distinct community. Since the racism
 Arab Americans face is also directed at other minorities, it seems only logi
 cal for Arab Americans to demystify stereotype in conjunction with the
 minorities at whom racism has traditionally been directed. More crucial,
 given the current deterioration of civil liberties and the precedent created by
 intense surveillance of the Arab American community, it would appear fool
 ish for other ethnic groups?many of them long suspected of subversion?
 to ignore Arab America. In any case, it is not necessarily a particular reaction
 to a particular event (9/11) that is of immense concern to Arab Americans;
 it is an entire culture of imperative patriotism?and all its attendant manifes
 tations?that existed years before 9/11 and was merely strengthened by the
 anxiety manufactured in the aftermath of the attacks.
 More important, the Arab American community is far from ethnically
 homogenous. Not all Arab Americans, for instance, oppose war in Iraq, as was
 made clear when Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz visited an Iraqi
 American community center in Detroit to great fanfare. Nor are they in
 agreement about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict; opinion ranges from a desire
 for the total destruction of Israel to support for binational coexistence to
 accommodation of Israeli settlements in return for a Palestinian state. Some
 Muslim Arabs prefer "Muslim" as their primary identification, which places
 them in a mostly non-Arab community. Similarly, many Lebanese Christians
 prefer to be identified as "Lebanese," "Maronite," "Christian" or even
 "Phoenecian" rather than as "Arab," even though Middle Eastern ethnicity is
 apparent in Lebanese Christians culturally and physically. Since they com
 prise the largest demographic in Arab America?with luminaries such as
 Frank Zappa, Danny Thomas, Ralph Nader, Kahlil Gibran, Helen Thomas,
 and Jamie Farr?the term Arab American is anything but trenchant. Some
 Coptic Egyptians, a growing demographic in the Detroit area, are likewise
 apt to call themselves "Copts" before "Arabs." Non-Arab Middle Easterners,
 as I have noted in a previous study, also complicate the Arab American eth
 nicity, since they are often categorized, of their own accord or according to
 stereotype, as Arab. These non-Arab Middle Easterners include Iranians,
 Turks, Kurds, Armenians, Berbers, Circassians, and Central Asians. Certain
 Mizrahi/Sephardic Jews in the United States also retain an Arab cultural tax
 onomy, either in addition to or instead of a Jewish identity.
 Given these diversities, I am hesitant at this point to theorize new direc
 tions in the Arab American community, although it is clear that 9/11 affect
 ed to varying degrees every demographic within Arab America. Because of
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 164 College Literature 32.2 [Spring 2005]
 this fact, all Arab Americans have a stake in examining the community in
 order to formulate material and academic strategies for awareness, empower
 ment, and reconciliation. Arab Americans?and, indeed, everybody con
 cerned with the racist undertones of a strengthened imperative patriotism
 after 9/11?can begin by complicating the simplification of ethnic cate
 gories that informs the pragmatism of foreign intervention and depleted civil
 liberties. I suspect that inter-ethnic dialogue, rather than colloquy with the
 dominant society that grants credence to anti-Arab racists, is a useful place to
 begin?and one that will bestow on ethnic studies educators an important
 material politics to discuss.
 Arab Americans After and Beyond
 Arab Americans are not without a foundation in undertaking political
 action and social analysis. Nor are they strangers to hate crimes as a result of
 American-Arab antagonism. The Nation, The Quill, The Progressive, School Law
 News, Newsweek, The Economist, and even Sports Illustrated and the Zionist
 edited New Republic have published stories in the past few decades about
 how, as James Abourezk puts it, "when the heat is on, Arab-Americans lose
 their rights" (1993, 26). Neither were they totally silent or invisible before
 9/11. Lawrence Davidson (1999) has shown that Arab Americans were active
 in protests against Zionism as early as 1917, the year of the Balfour
 Declaration. In modern times, Arab Americans were on the verge of viable
 political influence until it was interrupted by 9/11. In the lead-up to the
 2000 presidential election, the Christian Science Monitor, White House Weekly,
 Middle East, and Economist ran articles about the Arab American demograph
 ic with titles such as "The Birth of an Arab-American Lobby" and "Arab
 Americans Emerge as Key Voting Bloc."
 Nevertheless, there are unexamined features in Arab America that, if
 examined, could lead to a more developed understanding of the communi
 ty's role in the complex of mainstream-ethnic relations. The popularity of
 hip-hop and the widespread use of urban dialects among young Arab
 Americans, for instance, indicate that Arab Americans indeed "piggyback"
 Blacks in expressing their displeasure with a type of oppression they identi
 fy with Black history. A Palestinian American rapper calling himself the Iron
 Sheik recently released a self-made album with extraordinary range and
 depth. The Iron Sheik, influenced by multiethnic forebears, raps about
 Palestinian liberation, the oppression of Arab Americans, the loss of civil lib
 erties, and Arab American identity, and connects Arab American discourse in
 remarkable ways with injustices in the Hispanic, Black, and Native commu
 nities. Palestinian American poet Suheir Hammad is a performer in Russell
 Simmons s Broadway show, Def Poetry Jam. The late Edward Said, another
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 Steven Salaita 165
 Palestinian American, was a groundbreaking cultural critic whose reformu
 lation of the term Orientalism is employed frequently in Native and African
 American scholarship. These cross-cultural efforts are not new, however.
 Lebanese American civil rights activist Ralph Johns encouraged the famous
 1960 sit-in at the Woolworth's lunch counter in Greensboro. Palestinian
 American George Shibley defended innocent Mexican Americans after the
 Los Angeles Zoot Suit Riots of the 1940s. Based on these examples, it might
 be said that a common ground among ethnic groups already exists; we sim
 ply need to find a language to acknowledge it.
 Perhaps, however, the most favorable possibility for Arab Americans to
 engage interethnic dialogue lies in their opposition to Zionism. More than
 any other issue, Palestine mobilized Arab Americans to reject total assimila
 tion and embrace an alternate cultural positioning based on identification
 with the Middle East. By virtue of America's uncritical support for Israel,
 Palestine necessarily transformed Arab Americans from a rapidly acculturat
 ing immigrant group into a radical, anti-mainstream community. By exam
 ining how this positioning functions in their interaction with other radical
 communities of color, Arab Americans can gain the type of recognition they
 actually seek, rather than unwanted post-9/11 platitudes, and in turn gain
 more support for reducing American patrimony in the Middle East. If they
 manage to illustrate through activism and scholarship that Israel's occupation
 is a classic form of colonization rather than a benign security mechanism,
 then it is not unthinkable that a broad coalition can be formed to challenge
 the imperative patriotism that seems now to threaten only domestic Arabs,
 but in reality endangers all Americans. This possibility is particularly fruitful
 when we examine the colonization of North America and identify how it
 continues to influence the discourse of foreign intervention.
 Since what has been called decolonization of the mind is so central to
 the pedagogy of ethnic studies, Arab American concerns reach beyond the
 Arab American community. Yet the extensive reach of those concerns will
 not be acknowledged by chance. Arab Americans must force their recogni
 tion. Ethnic studies scholars, for their part, can find critical intersections of
 race, culture, and representation in the Arab American community. Minority
 scholarship has illustrated in the past twenty years that issues within different
 ethnic groups are never mutually exclusive, nor are the respective scholarly
 apparatuses in place to address those issues. If ethnic studies scholars are con
 cerned with community activism in addition to professional work, then
 America's rapidly changing social dynamics after 9/11 are ripe for assessment
 with priority on response, especially if we manage to transform "the
 American way of life" into "American ways of life." It is not by accident that
 I see ethnic studies as a possible solution to the diff?rend and the pragmatic
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 166 College Literature 32.2 [Spring 2005]
 strength of imperative patriotism, because if there are no solutions to be
 found in the field, then the field will have failed in its stated mission.
 Works Cited
 Abourezk, James G. 1993. "The Arab Scare: When the Heat Is On, Arab-Americans
 Lose Their Rights." The Progressive, May, 26-28.
 Abraham, Nabeel. 1994. "Anti-Arab Racism and Violence in the United States." The
 Development of Arab-American Identity. Ed. Ernest McCarus. Ann Arbor:
 University of Michigan Press.
 Akash, Munir, and Khaled Mattawa, eds. 1999. Post-Gibran: Anthology of New Arab
 American Writing. Bethesda, MD: JUSOOR.
 Ashcroft, Bill, and Pal AhluwaHa. 1999. Edward Said:The Paradox of Identity. New York:
 Roudedge.
 "The Birth of an Arab-American Lobby." 2000. The Economist, 14 October, 41.
 Brook, Daniel. 2002. "Pipes' Dreams." Philadelphia City Paper, 18 July, final edition.
 Christian, Barbara. 1990. "The Race for Theory." The Nature and Context of Minority
 Discourse. Ed. Abdul R. JanMohamed and David Lloyd. Oxford: Oxford
 University Press.
 Clemetson, Lynette, and Keith Naughton. 2001. "Patriotism vs. Ethnic Pride."
 Newsweek, 24 September, 69.
 Cole, David. 2003. "Patriot Act s Big Brother." The Nation, 27 February, 4.
 Cook-Lynn, Elizabeth. 1996. Why I Can't Read Wallace Stegner and Other Essays.
 Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
 Davidson, Lawrence. 1999 "Debating Palestine: Arab-American Challenges to
 Zionism, 1917-1932." In Arabs in America: Building a New Future, ed. Michael W
 Suleiman. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
 -. 2001. America's Palestine. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.
 Debre, Guillaume. 2000. "Arab Americans Emerge as Key Voting Bloc." Christian
 Science Monitor, 4 April, final edition.
 Deloria, Jr., Vine. 1988. Custer Died for Your Sins. 3rd ed. Norman: University of
 Oklahoma Press.
 Gasparello, Linda. 1999. "Arab-Americans Join Ethnic Electoral Wars." White House
 Weekly, 8 November.
 Ghannamjeff. 1991. "Arab Americans: All the Problems but None of the Attention."
 The Quill, May, 38.
 Goffe, Leslie. 1999. "Arab-Americans Coming in from the Cold." The Middle East,
 September, 22.
 Hanania, Ray. 1998. "One of the Bad Guys?" Newsweek, 2 November, 14.
 Hooglund, Eric, ed. 1987. Crossing the Waters: Arabic-Speaking Immigrants to the United
 States Before 1940. Washington, D. C: Smithsonian Institution Press.
 Lerner, Steve. 1986. "Terror Against Arabs in America: No More Looking the Other
 Way." The New Republic, July, 20-23.
 Lyotard, Jean-Fran?ois. 1988. The Diff?rend: Phrases in Dispute. Minneapolis:
 University of Minnesota Press.
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 Steven Salaita 167
 Majaj, Lisa Suhair. 1996. "Arab American Literature and the Politics of Memory."
 Memory and Cultural Politics, ed. Amritjit Singh,Joseph T Skerrettjr., and Robert
 E. Hogan. Boston: Northeastern University Press.
 -. 1999. "Arab-American Ethnicity: Location, Coalitions, and Cultural
 Negotiations." In Arabs in America: Building a New Future, ed. Michael W
 Suleiman. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
 -. 2000. "Arab Americans and the Meanings of Race." Postcolonial Theory and
 the United States, ed. Amritjit Singh and Peter Schmidt. Jackson: University Press
 of Mississippi.
 Michalek, Laurence. 1989. "The Arab in American Cinema: A Century of
 Otherness." Cin?aste 17.1: 3-9.
 Middle East Report. 2002. "Arabs, Muslims, and Race in America." 224.
 Muravchik, Joshua. 1999. "Terrorism at the Multiplex." Commentary, January, 57.
 "Muslim, Arab Students Wary of Attacks at School." 2001. School Law News, 28
 September, 8.
 Naber, Nadine. 2000. "Ambiguous Insiders: An Investigation of Arab American
 Invisibility." Ethnic and Racial Studies 23.1: 37-61.
 Naff,Alixa. 1993. Becoming American: The Early Arab Immigrant Experience.
 Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
 Najjar, Orayb Aref. 2000. "Can This Image Be Saved?: Arab-Americans and the
 Media." In Islam and the West in Mass Media. Ed. Kai Hafez. Mount Waverly,
 Australia: Hampton Press.
 Obenzinger, Hilton. 1999. American Palestine. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
 Peretz, Martin. 1995. "Gift to the World." The New Republic, June, 47.
 Pipes, Daniel. 2002. "The War on Campus." New York Post, 13 September, final
 edition.
 Raskin, Jamin B. 1991. "A Precedent for Arab-Americans?" The Nation, 4 February,
 117-18.
 Rosenfeld, Stephen S. 2003. "Beyond Slogans." Washington Post, 18 February, final
 edition.
 Said, Edward. 1994. Culture and Imperialism. New York: Vintage.
 Salaita, Steven. 2001. "'Sand-Niggers,' Small Shops, and Uncle Sam: Cultural
 Negotiation in the Fiction of Joseph Geha and Diana Abu-Jaber." Criticism 43:
 423-44.
 "Same Old Snoops." 1990. The Nation, 29 October, 4.
 Shaheenjack G. 2001. Reel Bad Arabs: How Hollywood Vilifies a People. Northampton,
 MA: Interlink.
 Shaheenjack G. 1976. The TV Arab. Madison, WI: Popular Press.
 -. 1996. "Arab-Americans at a Crossroads !'Journal of Palestine Studies 25.3:46
 59.
 Stockton, Ronald. 1994. "Ethnic Archetypes and the Arab Image." In The
 Development of Arab-American Identity. Ed. Ernest McCarus. Ann Arbor:
 University of Michigan Press.
 "Suddenly Visible." 2001. The Economist, 22 September, 31.
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
 168 College Literature 32.2 [Spring 2005]
 Suleiman, Michael W, ed. 1999. Arabs in America: Building a New Future. Philadelphia:
 Temple University Press.
 "They're Americans, Too." 1991. Sports Illustrated, 4 February, 9.
 Warrior, Robert Allen. 1995. "A Native American Perspective: Canaanites, Cowboys,
 and Indians." In Voices from the Margin, ed. R. S. Sugirtharajah. Maryknoll, New
 York: Orbis.
 -. 1996. Tribal Secrets. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
 Womack, Craig. 1999. Red on Red: Native American Literary Separatism. Minneapolis:
 University of Minnesota Press.
This content downloaded from
162.78.32.40 on Wed, 24 May 2023 18:11:48 +00:00
All use subject to https
